Doc update for concurrent search (#8181)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _search-plugins/concurrent-segment-search.md

## Enabling concurrent segment search at the index or cluster level

> In 2.17, OpenSearch is introducing a new setting `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` setting to control concurrent segment search setup on the cluster. The existing `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting is set to be deprecated in future releases in favor of the new setting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2.17, OpenSearch is introducing a new setting `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` to control concurrent segment search setup on the cluster. The existing `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting is set to be deprecated in future releases in favor of the new setting.
```

{: .note}

Both the cluster and index level `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` settings accept the following values:

`all`: Enables concurrent segment search across all search requests. This is equivalent to setting `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled: true`.

`none`: Disables concurrent segment search for all search requests, effectively turning off the feature. This is equivalent to `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled: false` setting. This is the **default** behavior.

`auto`: In this mode, OpenSearch will use the pluggable `ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider` to decide whether to use concurrent or sequential path for the search request based on the query evaluation and whether aggregations are present in the request. By default, if there are no deciders configured by any plugin, then the decision to use concurrent search will be made based on the presence of aggregations in the request.
For more information about the pluggable decider semantics see [Pluggable concurrent search deciders](#pluggable-concurrent-search-deciders-concurrentsearchrequestdecider)

> To enable concurrent segment search for all indexes in the cluster with `auto` mode, set the following dynamic cluster setting:

Reviewer: nit: I think lets give example about `all` mode instead of `auto` since its simpler to understand and is equivalent to previous example of `true`

The index-level setting takes priority over the cluster-level setting. Thus, if the cluster setting is enabled but the index setting is disabled, then concurrent segment search will be disabled for that index. Because of this, the index-level setting is not evaluated unless it is explicitly set, regardless of the default value configured for the setting. You can retrieve the current value of the index-level setting by calling the [Index Settings API]({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/api-reference/index-apis/get-settings/) and omitting the `?include_defaults` query parameter.
{: .note}

To enable concurrent segment search for all indexes in the cluster with `auto` mode, set the following dynamic cluster setting:
```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
   "persistent":{
      "search.concurrent_segment_search.mode": "auto"
   }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

To enable concurrent segment search in `auto` mode for a particular index, specify the index name in the endpoint:

```json
PUT <index-name>/_settings
{
    "index.search.concurrent_segment_search.mode": "auto"
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> This `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` setting accepts following three possible values:

Author: in the existing doc for the slice count, i saw that the setting update was first shown before providing valid accepted values. So i followed the same

```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When evaluating whether concurrent segment search is enabled on a cluster, the `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` setting takes precedence over `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting.
If the `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` is not explicitly set, the `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting will be evaluated to determine whether to enable concurrent segment search.

> For clusters upgrading from an older version with the existing `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting, this setting will continue to be honored. However, once the `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` is set, it will override the previous setting, enabling or disabling concurrent search based on the specified mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When upgrading a cluster from an earlier version that specifies the older `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` setting, this setting will continue to be honored. However, once the `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode` is set, it will override the previous setting, enabling or disabling concurrent search based on the specified mode.
```

> We recommend setting `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` to `null` on your cluster once you configure `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode`:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend setting `search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled` to `null` once you configure `search.concurrent_segment_search.mode`:
```

```json
PUT _cluster/settings
{
   "persistent":{
      "search.concurrent_segment_search.enabled": null
   }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

> To disable the old setting for a particular index, specify the index name in the endpoint:

Reviewer 3: "old" => "previous"?

### Setting the slicing mechanism

By default, concurrent segment search uses the Lucene mechanism to calculate the number of slices for each shard-level request.

> To use the max slice count mechanism instead, you can set the slice count for concurrent segment search at two levels:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the max slice count mechanism instead, you can set the slice count for concurrent segment search at either the cluster level or index level.
```

> - Cluster level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> - Index level

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> To configure the slice count for all indexes in the cluster, use the following dynamic cluster setting:

Reviewer 3: "a" cluster?

> To configure the slice count for all indexes in the cluster, use the following dynamic cluster setting:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To configure the slice count for all indexes in a cluster, use the following dynamic cluster setting:
```

For more information about how `shard_size` can affect both `doc_count_error_upper_bound` and collected buckets, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11680#issuecomment-1885882985).

## Developer information

The following sections provide additional information for developers.

### AggregatorFactory changes

> Because of implementation details, not all aggregator types can support concurrent segment search. To accommodate this, we have introduced a [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L123) method in the `AggregatorFactory` class to indicate whether a given aggregation type supports concurrent segment search. By default, this method returns `false`. Any aggregator that needs to support concurrent segment search must override this method in its own factory implementation. 

Reviewer 3: "Because of the implementation configuration"?

Reviewer 4: This is actually existing wording: https://opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/concurrent-segment-search/#developer-information-aggregatorfactory-changes

Reviewer 4: IMO we probably don't need to make changes to this paragraph since it's already published, I think it's just showing up in this PR because it was moved.

Reviewer 2: @jed326 I think "implementation details" reads better because it's commonly used.

> To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation works with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L123) method to return `true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation functions with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L123) method to return `true`.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: Line above: Is "override the method to return `true`" the clearest way of saying this?

### Pluggable concurrent search deciders: ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider

Because of implementation details, not all aggregator types can support concurrent segment search. To accommodate this, we have introduced a [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method in the `AggregatorFactory` class to indicate whether a given aggregation type supports concurrent segment search. By default, this method returns `false`. Any aggregator that needs to support concurrent segment search must override this method in its own factory implementation. 
Introduced 2.17
{: .label .label-purple }

> To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation works with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method to return `true`.

Reviewer 3: Line below: Should a word follow "factory"?

> Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision making for `auto` mode by extending [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java) and registering its factory through [`SearchPlugin#getConcurrentSearchRequestFactories()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/plugins/SearchPlugin.java#L148). The deciders are evaluated only if a request does not belong to any category listed in the [Limitations](#limitations) and [Other considerations](#other-considerations) sections. For more information about the decider implementation, see [the corresponding GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15259).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision-making for `auto` mode by extending the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java) and registering its factory through [`SearchPlugin#getConcurrentSearchRequestFactories()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/plugins/SearchPlugin.java#L148). The deciders are evaluated only if a request does not belong to any category listed in the [Limitations](#limitations) and [Other considerations](#other-considerations) sections. For more information about the decider implementation, see [the corresponding GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15259).
```

For more information about how `shard_size` can affect both `doc_count_error_upper_bound` and collected buckets, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11680#issuecomment-1885882985).

## Developer information: 

The following sections provide additional information for developers.

### AggregatorFactory changes

> Because of implementation details, not all aggregator types can support concurrent segment search. To accommodate this, we have introduced a [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L123) method in the `AggregatorFactory` class to indicate whether a given aggregation type supports concurrent segment search. By default, this method returns `false`. Any aggregator that needs to support concurrent segment search must override this method in its own factory implementation. 

Author: @jed326 changed to 2.x here

To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation works with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L123) method to return `true`.

### Pluggable concurrent search deciders: ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider

Introduced 2.17
{: .label .label-purple }

> Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision-making for `auto` mode by implementing the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java) and registering its factory via [`SearchPlugin#getConcurrentSearchRequestFactories()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/plugins/SearchPlugin.java#L148). The deciders are evaluated only if requests doesn't fall under the category called out in [Limitations](#limitations) or [Other Considerations](#other-considerations) section. For more information about the decider implementation see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15259)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision making for `auto` mode by extending [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java) and registering its factory through [`SearchPlugin#getConcurrentSearchRequestFactories()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/plugins/SearchPlugin.java#L148). The deciders are evaluated only if a request does not belong to any category listed in the [Limitations](#limitations) and [Other considerations](#other-considerations) sections. For more information about the decider implementation, see [the corresponding GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/15259).
```

> The search request is parsed using a `QueryBuilderVisitor` which calls [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#evaluateForQuery()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L36) of all the configured deciders for every node of the `QueryBuilder` tree in the search request. The final concurrent search decision is obtained by combining the decision from each decider returned by the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#getConcurrentSearchDecision()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L44)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The search request is parsed using a `QueryBuilderVisitor`, which calls the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#evaluateForQuery()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L36) method of all the configured deciders for every node of the `QueryBuilder` tree in the search request. The final concurrent search decision is obtained by combining the decision from each decider returned by the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#getConcurrentSearchDecision()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L44) method.
```

Because of implementation details, not all aggregator types can support concurrent segment search. To accommodate this, we have introduced a [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method in the `AggregatorFactory` class to indicate whether a given aggregation type supports concurrent segment search. By default, this method returns `false`. Any aggregator that needs to support concurrent segment search must override this method in its own factory implementation. 

To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation works with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method to return `true`.

### Pluggable concurrent search deciders: ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider

> Introduced 2.17

Author: Added this label, i saw some other features had this in the docs. Can remove it if its not required 

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/2ff2fc12-b10f-46c5-8b78-9cd5cfd5a7ac)

For more information about how `shard_size` can affect both `doc_count_error_upper_bound` and collected buckets, see [this GitHub issue](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/11680#issuecomment-1885882985).

## Developer information: 

### AggregatorFactory changes

Because of implementation details, not all aggregator types can support concurrent segment search. To accommodate this, we have introduced a [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method in the `AggregatorFactory` class to indicate whether a given aggregation type supports concurrent segment search. By default, this method returns `false`. Any aggregator that needs to support concurrent segment search must override this method in its own factory implementation. 

> To ensure that a custom plugin-based `Aggregator` implementation works with the concurrent search path, plugin developers can verify their implementation with concurrent search enabled and then update the plugin to override the [`supportsConcurrentSegmentSearch()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/bb38ed4836496ac70258c2472668325a012ea3ed/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/aggregations/AggregatorFactory.java#L121) method to return `true`.

Author: for the aggregator supports we are using specific commit version.. should we modify this too?

Author: changed the AggregatorFactory code pointers to point to 2.x to keep consistent with other code pointers we are adding

### Pluggable concurrent search deciders: ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider

> Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision-making for `auto` mode by implementing the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/c505709d73587fd2fdb714d24510b44ae07aa4a6/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L29).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Plugin developers can customize the concurrent search decision-making for `auto` mode by implementing the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/2.x/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java).
```

Let's just link against `2.x` so we don't have to change this if there are any changes in the future.

Reviewer 4: Same for the below 2 links too

The search request is parsed using the [`ConcurrentSearchVisitor`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/c505709d73587fd2fdb714d24510b44ae07aa4a6/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchVisitor.java) and the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#evaluateForQuery()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/c505709d73587fd2fdb714d24510b44ae07aa4a6/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L36) method is invoked from every node of the `QueryBuilder` tree in the search request.
The final concurrent search decision for the plugin is provided by the [`ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider#getConcurrentSearchDecision()`](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/blob/c505709d73587fd2fdb714d24510b44ae07aa4a6/server/src/main/java/org/opensearch/search/deciders/ConcurrentSearchRequestDecider.java#L44).

> 

Reviewer 4: Maybe mention the opt out mechanism too

Author: Added the related github issue.

> If no pluggable deciders are provided, the concurrent search decision is made based on the presence of aggregations in the query with the existing limitations called out in [Limitations](#limitations)   

Reviewer 4: The limitations are still respected regardless of the concurrent search deciders right? This sort of implies that deciders can override the existing limitations. We should also clarify that it does not override the `AggregatorFactory` setting from above either.

Author: Hmm yes, i see what you mean. I want to capture that the limitations still exist. will not mentioning it be sufficient? Especially since we explicitly say if aggregations are present.. we should qualify that still only supported aggregations will work. Let me see how i can rephrase this

Reviewer: Probably we can call that in the begining itself. Tried to frame it [here](https://github.com/opensearch-project/documentation-website/pull/8181/files#r1746094271)

> If no pluggable deciders are provided, the concurrent search decision is made based on the presence of aggregations in the query with the existing limitations called out in [Limitations](#limitations)   

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If no deciders are provided, the concurrent search decision is made based on the presence of aggregations in the query with the existing limitations called out in [Limitations](#limitations)   
```
